Hello there!
In this video, we are going to look at atomic operations.
The atomic type supports a number of operations. We can store(),
which will atomically replace the object's
value with its argument
and load() which will atomically return the object's value.
These are equivalent to assigning to and assigning from an atomic variable.
And in fact, you can write it using the normal equals sign.
It is probably better, though, if you do use the names which are specific for atomic variables, as
that will make it easier to see that the variable is atomic.
There's also an exchange() member function,
which will replace the object's value and return the previous
value.
So this is a bit like doing a postfix increment where you increment and get the old value,
except it
can be any value.
It does not have to be old value plus one.
Those member functions are common to all the atomic specializations. If we have pointers and integers, we
can also do increment and decrement, += and -=.
The integer specialisations also have a fetch_add() and a fetch_sub() which are atomic versions of postfix
increment and decrement,
and there are some operators for doing bitwise logical operations atomically.
So that is "and" with the single ampersand &, "or" with a single bar | and "exor" ^.
There is another atomic type which comes in useful.
This is atomic underscore flag, which is an atomic boolean type.
It is guaranteed to be lock free and it has less overhead than the bool instantiation of the atomic
template.
It only supports three operations.
We can call clear(), which will set the Boolean to be false.
We can call test_and_set() which will set the flag to be true.
And the interesting bit is that it will return the previous value.
So, again, this is rather like a postfix operation.
Like doing the postfix increment, we do the
operation and we get the previous value. And we will see in a minute why that is useful.
And there is also the assignment operator.
Instances of atomic_flag must be initialized,
and the only possibility is ATOMIC_FLAG_INIT,
which is equivalent to false.
So the idea is that you create a shared atomic_flag variable,
which is initially false, and then you
have several threads which try to call test_and_set().
So all these threads are trying to change the value of the flag.
If the return value is true, then that means that the flag already had the value true,
so we have not
changed it.
If the returned value is false, then that means we have changed the value of the flag.
And we can use
this property to impose a "happens before" ordering on the threats that are checking this flag.
So this needs a bit of thinking about.
Let's try and break it down. So the code would look like this.
We create the flag value and initialize it to false.
We have a thread function which calls test_and_set() on this flag variable.
This is in a loop.
The way this works is that if test_and_set() returns false,
then we are the thread that got to change
the value and none of the other threads can do that.
So if we execute the critical section,
we will be the only thread that can do that.
While are we doing that, all the other threads are calling test_and_set() and getting the return value
true, which indicates that they have not changed the value, so they continue looping.
Eventually, we get to the end of our critical section.
We clear the flag. We set it to false.
And then the next thread that calls test_and_set() will be able
to change the value and then that thread can run its critical section.
So let's go over this again. We initialize the flag to false, then each thread starts by calling
test_and_set(). If this returns true, then it means some other thread is executing the critical section.
So we loop and try again.
If test_and_set() returns false, that means that we have set the flag and we can proceed into the
critical section.
And then when we exit the critical section, we set the flag to false.
And that will allow another thread to enter the critical section.
This is something that is known as a spin lock.
So let's have a look at this.
We have gone back to the example we had near the start
where we were printing out strings in threads within
loops.
In our print function, instead of having a mutex or a lock guard or a unique lock,
we have this spinning
test_and_set().
So there is our atomic flag.
Initialized to false. Then each thread is calling test_and_set() before the critical region.
If this returns true, we know some other thread is executing this code.
And if it returns false then
we know that we are the only one. And then we clear the flag at the end of the section.
So let's see if this works.
So there we are.
That looks OK. Try it a few more times to make sure there are not any...
No, we do not seem to be triggering it.
And just to prove that this is doing something, let's comment these calls out.
So it does not look quite so good.
Let's see if we can get the race condition.
There we are. So we have "abc" and "xyz" mixed up. So we get the data race when we remove the spin lock.
And then if we put it back, it should work again.
Okay.
And then the headers are just normal ones. We use the  header for atomic flag as well as for
the atomic type.
What are the advantages of a spin lock?
One advantage is that when a thread is spinning, it remains active.
It can execute immediately when
the call to test_and_set() returns. With a mutex, the thread may have been put to sleep while it was waiting
and the thread may need to be reloaded or even woken up.
On the other hand, it is processor intensive. We have all these threads which are executing tight
while loops.
So all these processors are going to be running red hot!
We should only do this for a very short period of time.
So we need to keep the critical section very short when we are doing this.
And also, if there is very low contention, if there are not many threads which are competing for the
same spin lock.
Because of this, spin locks tend to be used in operating systems and libraries rather than in application
code.
And one serious problem, if we have threads which are spinning and they interrupt each other, that
can really hammer performance.
So it does really need to be done by people who know what they are doing.
One of the main applications of a spin lock is for implementing a mutex.
Obviously, spin locks are not suitable for all mutexes if they have to wait a long time
or if there is
lots of contention. But many operating systems implement what is called a hybrid mutex.
So they spin briefly to see if they can get the lock straight away.
And if they cannot get the lock, then they do the full mutex.
Let's quickly go through the reasons why the spin lock is thread-safe.
Again, it comes down to acquire-release semantics.
When a thread reads the flag as clear, it acquires exclusive access to the critical section.
When a thread sets the flag as clear, it will release exclusive access to the critical section.
And it will also release the result of any modification which was made in the critical section.
The next thread that reads the flag as clear and requires exclusive access will also acquire the
result of those modifications.
So when we have one thread that prints some output and then the next thread prints some output,
the second thread will get the modified state of the output stream and it will not interleave its
output.
So these acquire and release semantics impose the "happens before" ordering on accesses to the variable
or critical section.
There is no data race and the program is always in a consistent state.
Okay, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding!